PLATEN-79 - Dynamic GitHub branch protection status checks (#67)
JDASoftwareGroup/jdatech.github.io: _posts/2024-01-23-ensuring-code-quality-a-guide-to-dynamic-git-hub-pull-request-gates.markdown

---
layout: single
title: "Ensuring Code Quality: A Guide to Dynamic GitHub Pull Request Gates"
tags: technology github devops
date: 2024-01-23 00:00:00 +0100
author: David Werner
author_profile: true
header:
  overlay_image: assets/images/tech_gear_banner.jpg
  overlay_filter: 0.2
  show_overlay_excerpt: false
---

# Ensuring Code Quality: A Guide to Dynamic GitHub Pull Request Gates

In the dynamic world of software development, maintaining the integrity of your codebase is paramount. 
GitHub, a collaborative coding platform, provides a robust toolkit to uphold the quality and security of your projects.

GitHub's [branch protection rules](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/configuring-branches-and-merges-in-your-repository/managing-protected-branches/about-protected-branches) 
with mandatory [status checks](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/configuring-branches-and-merges-in-your-repository/managing-protected-branches/about-protected-branches#require-status-checks-before-merging) 
stand as a bulwark, ensuring that contributions can only merge into the main branch after passing through quality and 

> security gates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
security checks.
```
Reason I've changed it is because that is the term in GitHub CI/CD

But hey, you're still with us! 
Your interest in CI/CD, DevOps, and the intricate dance of collaboration in the software development world is palpable. 
Excellent!<br>
Now, let's dive into the realm of _dynamic_ status checks — a feature not directly supported by GitHub out of the box, 
but fear not, there are workarounds to achieve this goal.

## The Problem

In the branch protection rules of the main branch, configuring the required status checks for a
[pull request](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/about-pull-requests) 
is crucial. 

> Standard checks, such as linting, unit tests, and code coverage, are typically required for all pull requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Standard checks, such as linting, unit tests, and code coverage, should be typically required for all pull requests.
```

> This is a workflow example to check the source code changes of an application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following is a workflow example to check the source code changes of an application.
```

The tests are executed in job `test` after the application got built and deployed.
Therefore, job `test` should be configured as required status check in the branch protection rules.

```yaml
on:
  pull_request:
    paths:
      - src/**
      - tests/**

jobs:
  build-deploy:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      [...]
    
  test:
    needs: build-deploy    
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      [...]
```

However, running this workflow is expensive and time-consuming because the application first needs to be built and 
deployed before the tests can be executed. 
And the tests themselves can also take quite some time.

> Therefore, the test workflow should only be triggered if the source code or the tests themselves have changed.
> And for example not for documentation changes.<br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, the test workflow should only be triggered if the source code or the tests themselves have changed.
In contrast, unrelated changes such as documentation changes should not trigger code related checks.<br>
```

reusable workflow as the skipping happens on workflow parent level, not child level.

The workaround is to configure an additional, standard job `test-completed` that concludes the workflow as status 
check and fails if the `test` failed before.<br>
Setting `if: always()` ensures that the job is always executed, even if the `test` job failed.

```yaml
on:
  pull_request:
    
jobs:
  check-if-relevant:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    outputs:
      is-relevant: ${{ '{{' }} steps.relevant-files-changed.outputs.any_changed }}
    steps:
     [...]
 
  build-deploy:
    needs: check-if-relevant
    if: needs.check-if-relevant.outputs.is-relevant == 'true'
    uses: ./.github/workflows/release.build_deploy.yml
    secrets: inherit  

  test:
    needs: build-deploy
    uses: ./.github/workflows/test.execution.yml
    secrets: inherit
    with:
      app-url: ${{ '{{' }} needs.build-deploy.outputs.app-url }}

  test-completed:
    needs: test
    runs-on: 'ubuntu-latest'
    if: always()
    steps:
      - name: Check test job status
        if: needs.test.result == 'failure'
        run: exit 1

> ```

Reviewer: Maybe add a small section of what is the adv/disadv of this approach(I only see these for the following alternate approach(or does the adv/disadv apply to both?).

Author: I changed the titles of the two workflows and renamed the adv/disadv of the alternative approach to `Comparison`.

## Alternative Approach

Another workaround is to add job like the `required-status-check` in the following example to all dynamically required workflows.

```yaml
on:
  pull_request:
    paths:
      - src/**
      - tests/**

jobs:  
  build-deploy:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      [...]

  test:
    needs: build-deploy
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      [...]
    
  required-status-check:
    needs: test
    runs-on: 'ubuntu-latest'
    if: always()
    steps:
      - name: Check workflow status
        if: needs.test.result != 'success'
        run: exit 1
```

This job would return a failure state if the tests of job `test` failed.

In the repo settings configure `required-status-check` as required status check in the branch protection
rules of the main branch.<br>
The pull requests get blocked if none of the triggered workflows have implemented the `required-status-check` job or at
least one of them is failing.<br>
It gets unblocked if at least one `required-status-check` job is implemented and all of them are successful. 

> And usually, at least one workflow needs to run in any case (e.g. a lint or source formatting check) and can implement

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's worth noting that at least one workflow needs to run in any case (e.g. a lint or source formatting check) and can be piggybacked to implement
```

this.

### Advantages

> *   Only those workflows get executed that are actually required, because the list of relevant files are declared at the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   Only those workflows get executed that are actually apply to the changed files, because the list of relevant files are declared at the
```

    `pull_request` trigger.

>     So, the status check overview of the pull request is limited to the relevant checks and no workflow is run unnecessarily.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    As a result, the status check overview of the pull request is limited to the relevant checks and no workflow is run unnecessarily.
```

              files: package-lock.json
    ```

### Disadvantages

*   Though this approach would reduce the number of workflow runs, it does run the additional `required-status-check`
    job whenever the dynamically required workflow needs to be executed.
    And everytime for the workflow that acts as a fallback.<br>
    On the other hand, it executes very fast and doesn't cost much in terms of GitHub runner time. 
*   This approach is a little bit more complex as the fallback workflow has to be kept in mind.
*   It is not transparent for a GitHub repo admin what status checks are actually executed by just taking a look at the
    branch protection rules, as `required-status-check` or a similar name will be quite generic.

## Conclusion

GitHub's branch protection rules with required status checks are a powerful tool to ensure quality and security.
They are only missing the ability to configure dynamic status checks that are only required if relevant changed had been
committed.

However, we have two workarounds to solve this problem:
1. Check for the relevant file changes in a job of the workflow itself and execute the actual status check only for 
   relevant changes.

> 2. Add a concluding job to all dynamically required workflows and configure it as required status check.

Reviewer: Want to add something in the lines of:"as this feature evolves, and GitHub gathers more user feedback around such issues, our hope would be that such workarounds will become obsolete."
